Improve testing docs (#1875)
pmndrs/zustand: docs/guides/testing.md

---
title: Testing
description: Writing Tests
nav: 9
---

## Setting Up a Test Environment

### Test Runners

Usually, your test runner needs to be configured to run JavaScript/TypeScript syntax. If you're
going to be testing UI components, you will likely need to configure the test runner to use JSDOM
to provide a mock DOM environment.

See these resources for test runner configuration instructions:

- **Jest**
  - [Jest: Getting Started](https://jestjs.io/docs/getting-started)
  - [Jest: Configuration - Test Environment](https://jestjs.io/docs/configuration#testenvironment-string)
- **Vitest**
  - [Vitest: Getting Started](https://vitest.dev/guide)
  - [Vitest: Configuration - Test Environment](https://vitest.dev/config/#environment)

### UI and Network Testing Tools

#### Web

**We recommend using [React Testing Library (RTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro)
to test React components that connect to Zustand**. `RTL` is a simple and complete React DOM
testing utility that encourages good testing practices. It uses `ReactDOM`'s render function and
act from `react-dom/tests-utils`. (The [Testing Library](https://testing-library.com/) family of

> tools also includes adapters for many other popular frameworks too.)

Reviewer: nit: Sorry, but "also" and "too" is redundant. Maybe remove "too"

#### Native

**We recommend using [Native Testing Library (RNTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-native-testing-library/intro)
to test React Native components that connect to Zustand**. `RTL` is a simple and complete native
testing utility that encourages good testing practices. The API is the same as `RTL` library with

> some mire differences like `RNTL` queries are implemented independently, unlike other wrappers that

Reviewer: "mire" -> Did you mean "minor"?

Author: Yes, haha

use `DOM Testing Library`.

#### Network Requests

We also recommend using [Mock Service Worker (MSW)](https://mswjs.io/) to mock network requests, as
this means your application logic does not need to be changed or mocked when writing tests.

- **React Testing Library**
  - [DOM Testing Library: Setup](https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/setup)
  - [React Testing Library: Setup](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/setup)
  - [Testing Library Jest-DOM Matchers](https://testing-library.com/docs/ecosystem-jest-dom)
- **Native Testing Library**
  - [Native Testing Library: Setup](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-native-testing-library/setup)
- **Mock Service Worker**
  - [MSW: Installation](https://mswjs.io/docs/getting-started/install)
  - [MSW: Setting up mock requests](https://mswjs.io/docs/getting-started/mocks/rest-api)
  - [MSW: Mock server configuration for Node](https://mswjs.io/docs/getting-started/integrate/node)

## Setting Up Zustand for testing

> Since `Jest` and `Vitest` have slight difference like `Vitest` uses **ES modules** and `Jest`

Reviewer: > Since `Jest` and `Vitest` have slight difference like `Vitest` uses **ES modules** and `Jest` uses **CommonJS modules**

Maybe

> Since `Jest` and `Vitest` have slight differences, like `Vitest` using **ES modules** and `Jest` using **CommonJS modules**,

(tense, "s" and an additional ",")

// setup-vitest.ts
import { vi } from 'vitest'
vi.mock('zustand') // to make it works like `Jest` (auto-mocking)
```

> **Note**: you can remove `import { vi } from 'vitest'` when [globals configuration](https://vitest.dev/config/#globals)
> is enabled

```ts
// vite.config.ts or vitest.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
// import { defineConfig } from 'vitest/config' // if you are using vitest without vite

export default defineConfig({
  test: {
    // ...
    setupFiles: ['setup-vitest.ts'],
  },
})
```

In the next examples we are going to use `useStore`

> **Note**: all of these examples are written using `TypeScript`

```ts
// stores/user-store.ts
import { create } from 'zustand'

export type Store = {
  count: number
  inc: () => void
}

export const useStore = create<Store>()((set) => ({
  count: 1,
  inc: () => set((state) => ({ count: state.count + 1 })),
}))
```

### Testing components

```tsx
// components/counter.tsx
import { useStore } from '../stores/user-store'

function Counter() {
  const { count, inc } = useStore()

  return (
    <div>
      <span>{count}</span>
      <button onClick={inc}>one up</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

### Testing stores

> Still in progres. TBD

Reviewer: Lets remove this (I know this PR is still draft, but just a reminder).

Author: Yeah, I'll add it

})
```

```ts
// src/setup-jest.ts
import '@testing-library/jest-dom'
```

```ts
// jest.config.ts
import type { JestConfigWithTsJest } from 'ts-jest'

const config: JestConfigWithTsJest = {
  preset: 'ts-jest',
  testEnvironment: 'jsdom',
  setupFilesAfterEnv: ['./src/setup-jest.ts'],
}

export default config
```

> **Note**: to use typescript we need to install two packages `ts-jest` and `ts-node`

### Vitest

In the next steps we are going to setup our `Vitest` environment in order to mock `Zustand`

```ts
// src/__mocks__/zustand.ts
import * as zustand from 'zustand'
import { act } from '@testing-library/react'

const { create: actualCreate } = await vi.importActual<typeof zustand>(
  'zustand'
)

// a variable to hold reset functions for all stores declared in the app
export const storeResetFns = new Set<() => void>()

// when creating a store, we get its initial state, create a reset function and add it in the set
export const create = (<T extends unknown>() => {

>   console.log('zustand create mock')
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

})
```

> **Note:** without [globals configuration](https://vitest.dev/config/#globals) enabled you need to
> use `import { beforeEach, vi } from 'vitest'` at top level

```ts
// src/setup-vitest.ts
import '@testing-library/jest-dom'

> vi.mock('zustand') // to make it works like `Jest` (auto-mocking)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vi.mock('zustand') // to make it work like Jest (auto-mocking)
```

```

> > **Note**: without [globals configuration](https://vitest.dev/config/#globals) enabled you need to
> > use `import { vi } from 'vitest'` at top level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** without [globals configuration](https://vitest.dev/config/#globals) enabled, you need to
> add `import { beforeEach, vi } from 'vitest'` at the top of each test file.
```

```ts
// vitest.config.ts
import { defineConfig, mergeConfig } from 'vitest/config'
import viteConfig from './vite.config'

export default mergeConfig(
  viteConfig,
  defineConfig({
    test: {
      globals: true,
      environment: 'jsdom',
      setupFiles: ['./setup-vitest.ts'],
    },
  })
)
```

### Testing components

> In the next examples we are going to use `useCounterStore`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next examples we are going to use `useCounterStore`.
```

> > **Note**: all of these examples are written using `TypeScript`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** all of these examples are written using TypeScript.
```

}
```

```ts
// components/counter/index.ts
export * from './counter'
```

```tsx
// components/counter/counter.test.tsx
import { render, screen } from '@testing-library/react'
import userEvent from '@testing-library/user-event'

import { Counter } from './counter'

describe('Counter', () => {

>   test('should render successfully', async () => {

Reviewer 2: _should render successfully_ is a poor name for a test,
because _successfully_ doesn't add any more context,
and it omits an important detail of the initial value.

```suggestion
  test('should render with initial count of 1', async () => {
```

    renderCounter()

    expect(await screen.findByText(/^1$/)).toBeInTheDocument()
    expect(
      await screen.findByRole('button', { name: /one up/i })
    ).toBeInTheDocument()
  })

>   test('should increase count', async () => {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  test('should increase count by clicking a button', async () => {
```

    const user = userEvent.setup()

> 

Reviewer 2: Test setup can be grouped together without empty lines.

```suggestion
```

    renderCounter()

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    expect(await screen.findByText(/^1$/)).toBeInTheDocument()

    await user.click(await screen.findByRole('button', { name: /one up/ }))

    expect(await screen.findByText(/^2$/)).toBeInTheDocument()
  })
})

const renderCounter = () => {
  return render(<Counter />)
}
```

> **Note**: without [globals configuration](https://vitest.dev/config/#globals) enabled you need to
> use `import { describe, test, expect } from 'vitest'` at top level

**CodeSandbox Demos:**

- Jest Demo: https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/friendly-breeze-276c28
- Vitest Demo: https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/zustand-vitest-demo-ph5gnj

## References

- **React Testing Library**: [React Testing Library (RTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro)

>   is a very light-weight solution for testing React components. It provides light utility functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  is a very lightweight solution for testing React components. It provides utility functions
```

  on top of `react-dom` and `react-dom/test-utils`, in a way that encourages better testing
  practices. Its primary guiding principle is: "The more your tests resemble the way your software
  is used, the more confidence they can give you."

> - **Native Testing Library**: [Native Testing Library (RNTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-native-testing-library/intro)
>   is a very light-weight solution for testing React Native components. It provides light utility
>   functions on top of `react-test-renderer`, in a way that encourages better testing practices. Its
>   primary guiding principle is as `RTL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Native Testing Library**: [Native Testing Library (RNTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-native-testing-library/intro)
  is a solution for testing React Native components, similarly to RTL,
  but its functions are built on top of `react-test-renderer`.
```
